
Old David Beckett, though he never spoke on the subject, was haunted by
memories of a childhood passed amid scenes of refinement and wealth.
He had a hazy impression that his father had been a gentleman of local
distinction in a Canadian town.  However, with his father's death had
come a change in the fortunes of the family.  Its members had drifted
apart, and David himself, at the time scarcely more than a child, had
gone to Philadelphia.  Year after year he had worked in the car shops
until the lead in the paint had affected his health.  This break-down
had occurred after his wife's death, in his fiftieth year.  Reduced in
strength he had come to the Point where one of the owners of the shops,
in recognition of his long and faithful service, had given him a little
house and a bit of land.  This change David had welcomed, but it had
engendered in his son Thomas a brooding discontent which had increased
with the years.

Brought up in Philadelphia until his tenth year, Thomas Beckett had
received a rudimentary training in the public schools, and this
training, after coming to the Point, he had managed to eke out with
haphazard reading.  But the cheerless surroundings had fostered in him
a tendency to indulge fits of melancholy.  Without visible cause, he
would become taciturn.  When he was twenty-one his father urged him to
marry and settle down, but domestic life had small attraction for
Thomas, and it was a surprise to the old man when he finally acted on
the suggestion.  At the time of his marriage the young lobsterman was
thirty years old, tall and broad shouldered, with bold intelligent eyes
gazing out from beneath heavy brows, and a moustached lip that, as he
spoke, lifted slightly, showing the tips of the white teeth.  One raw
day he had sailed away from the Point with a cargo of lobsters, and a
fortnight later had returned with the meek and fragile Lavina.

During the short period of her wedded life the young wife had
contributed to the house of the father and son an air of comfort.
Geraniums had bloomed at the windows and the curtains of the front room
had been kept white; all the beds had been covered with bright
patch-work quilts and the dishes had been washed as soon as used and
arranged in gleaming rows in the cupboard.  But from the hour of
Thomas's desertion, Lavina had relaxed her care of the house.  Now,
after her death, the change in it was complete.  The curtains were
dingy, the plants dead, fish-heads from the dog's dish littered the
kitchen floor and flies buzzed about the rich messes Nora Gage was
constantly preparing for her own consumption.  The deterioration in the
home suggested a picture by Hogarth.

David Beckett was bewildered.  He would have preferred absolute
solitude to the presence of Nora Gage, but the fat woman had
established herself with the intention of remaining and he was too old
and too ineffectual to know how to get rid of her.  Often, from a
distance, he would stare at the house with a look of indecision, then,
with an oath, he would start on a rapid trot for the kitchen.  But once
in the presence of the woman, his courage forsook him.  With one glance
from her little crevice eyes, Nora dominated him.

However, she had one virtue.  Though she ignored the appeal of hanging
buttons and refused to patch his clothes, she fed him.  For that
matter, it was her custom to feed every living thing that came under
her notice, the dog, the chickens, even flies.  For the flies she had
been known to scatter sugar grains, leaning heavily on a substantial
elbow to watch the progress of the tiny meal.  To old David's food she
gave especial attention.  His teeth suggested isolated stumps in a
clearing; therefore she prepared soft foods for him, porridges and
soups, and, while he ate, she was wont to watch him.  Her jaws would
move in sympathy and in profound contemplation she would even lick her
lips.

On Sundays Nora rolled out of bed at an early hour, and, with her
prayer book clasped in her pudgy fingers and her too plump bust visibly
undulating, she proceeded by slow stages to Old Harbour, where she
attended both early mass and vespers in the ancient Catholic church.
This church was none too well thought of by the majority of the
townspeople, who in the latter years had turned Protestant.  Though
placed solemnly in the very centre of the town, the edifice was
entirely nautical in character, and many were the sympathetic
quiverings of its bell when there was a storm off Pemoquod.  It seemed
to be sounding a requiem for its invisible congregation of sailormen of
every port and clime.  Perhaps it was the sight of an occasional
sea-faring stranger with a bold look in his eyes that attracted Nora.
Or perhaps it was the nearness of a certain little eating-house in a
side street, owned by a friend, Katherine Fry.

The hours not occupied in divine worship, Nora was accustomed to spend
with Katherine in a room curtained off from the public gaze.  There,
the one buttressed with unwholesome fat, the eyes playing in her
countenance the part of little, gleaming, deep-driven nails, the other,
lank as a skeleton, in a shawl the fringe of which suggested her own
cookery, the friends were wont to regale themselves, Nora with rich
cakes and pastry, Katherine with the quarters and dimes her customer
unwillingly relinquished to her.  Quarrels were frequent, for each had
a spiteful understanding of the other's vice; but greed united them.

"I tell ye," old David would remark when of a Sunday he had undisputed
possession of his lonely grey old house and with Zarah Patch could
enjoy to the full the pleasures of a pipe before the kitchen ingle--a
pleasure denied him during the week--"I tell ye, Zary, I thank the Lord
Nora has religious inclinations!  As for me," he would add, hanging his
head with a sudden change of mood, "I'm old and filled with wickedness;
the wickedness of the world has got to the very marrow of my bones.  I
ain't fit to bring up no child, Zary."

However, he did bring up the infant literally by hand.  Puny, touching,
defenceless, the tiny creature, surrounded from the moment of its birth
with these oddly unfavourable conditions, asserted at once its
independence.  It screamed and squirmed every time Nora Gage took it
up, so that the care of it devolved entirely upon the grandfather.  But
far from complaining, he was secretly flattered by this preference.
"She feels the tie of blood," he would explain, "but don't you mind,
Nora, she'll outgrow these little ways."  The woman, however, laughed
straight in his face.  She was not particularly anxious that the baby
should outgrow them.

The infant early became a tyrant.  She was not a very pretty child.
From beneath a high rounded forehead peered forth two eyes dark and
restless.  They had the furtive look seen in the eyes of some animals,
save that the pupils had a way of expanding suddenly with inquiry.
Even before she could speak, her crowing had a strong note of
interrogation.  "Eee?" she would pipe, raising imperceptible eyebrows,
and the old man, as well as he could for chuckling, would answer in the
same cryptic language.  She had, moreover, a very amusing and energetic
way of creeping.

When the times for her feeding arrived, she was always close beside the
door; and there old David found her when, big silver watch in hand, he
came hastening up from the dory.  He carried the odour of the lobsters,
and before he could do anything else he must wash his hands.  Then the
bottle must be scalded and rinsed and the milk warmed.  All the
wrinkles of his face drew together, such was the care with which he
performed these operations; and eager-eyed, occasionally fretting if he
were late or particularly slow, the infant watched him from her place
on the floor.  Presently he lifted her; then what a picture of peace!

With both hands she clutched the bottle and a soft gurgling, similar to
the purring of a cat, filled the room.  She laughed, and the look of
rapturous content which filled her face was reflected in the
countenance of the grandfather.  They looked oddly, touchingly alike.
Occasionally it was necessary for him to draw the bottle away in order
that she might take breath, and at such times she either pursued it
with her rosy, clinging mouth, or, being partially satisfied, turned to
thrust her fingers between his lips or to pull his beard.  Weary as he
was from the labour that had occupied him since four in the morning,
nothing could have prevailed upon him to relinquish these ministrations
to his granddaughter.

When she was nine months old, he had her christened in the Catholic
church before a figure of St. Anthony, which seemed to his anxious mind
to be of a friendly mien.  But it was with no idea of turning her over
to the church.  Her religion when she grew up should be a thing of her
own choosing.  Meanwhile he hearkened to the persuasions of Nora Gage,
and the child was baptized Rachel Beckett in honour of his dead wife.
After that event, however, the housekeeper lapsed into her former state
of indifference; and, neglected on the one hand, and foolishly indulged
on the other, the child's life flowed on until her fifth year.  When
she was five years old a change dawned for her.  In the care of the boy
from the lighthouse she went to the district school, where she was
enrolled as a pupil.

Lizzie Goodenough never abbreviated her son's name.  She called him
boldly Andr√© Garins.  But when he gave this name at school, the older
boys put tongue in cheek.  He was an exceedingly handsome lad, with a
woodsy grace.  Moreover, his ears were slightly pointed like a fawn's;
nor did the likeness end there, for his eyes under the thick mat of
hair had a wild and impenetrable look and his soft arched lips seemed
formed for other speech than that of human beings.  When addressed, he
would either twist his fingers in a kind of wordless agony, or take
fleetly to his heels.  He was considered an "innocent" by the folk of
the Point.

He led Rachel to the school, her tiny cold hand resting noncommittally
in his, and left her stranded before the teacher's desk.  But that
brisk person frightened the child and she became as restless as a
little trapped animal.  She refused to learn her letters, she refused
to learn to count; Andr√© Garins, stealthily on the watch, was ashamed
of her.  But one day she heard the teacher explaining a point in
geography by means of a map on the wall and her eyes suddenly dilated.
All at once those monotonous recitations, to which she was wont to shut
her ears, those garbled descriptions of mountains, oceans, and
climates, assumed a startling significance.  In that map grimed by
smoke and the breath of generations of children, in that square of
painted canvas, with its spots of blue for the water, its spots of
yellow and pink for the land, its black veins for rivers, and its fuzzy
lines, like caterpillars, for the mountains, she beheld what was an
actual vision of the actual world.  And this brilliancy of the
imagination, this power to touch with life and colour any fact that
penetrated her brain at all, proved to be a special gift.  But she was
too young to understand the liberation that comes through books.

The schoolroom seemed to her the one point of stagnation in an active
world.  She longed to the point of tears for the sight of trees of
which she was temporarily deprived, and for the smell of the outdoor
air.  The teacher finally in despair left her alone.  With something
disconcerting in her extraordinarily intelligent eyes, she gazed about
her at the other pupils as if she dimly recognised herself as belonging
to a distinct and lonely species.  Perhaps some subtle power of
reasoning underneath the dark hair which grew in a point on her
forehead, revealed to her that their needs were not her needs.  As
instinctively as a plant, she selected from the atmosphere surrounding
her what she most required for growth; and idleness offered opportunity
for observations, shrewd, penetrating, constant.

Lizzie Goodenough's son was the one child admitted to her friendship.
In winter she permitted him to drag her to and from school on his sled,
and in summer she allowed him to string thimble-berries for her on a
long grass, which could be smuggled under the desk out of sight of the
teacher and eaten at odd moments, when one stood in such dire need of
refreshment in the dry country of learning.  But, strictly speaking,
she had no companions.

For her grandfather a warm strong love beat in her little heart.  Often
she would clasp him about the neck with one thin arm, and with the
other hand against his cheek, would gaze intently upon him until a
simultaneous gleam of laughter shot into both their faces.  Then she
would nestle to him, quivering with a divine mirth which was the mask
of diviner tears.

For Nora Gage, Rachel entertained a silent dislike that expressed
itself in manoeuvres to keep out of her way.  If Nora entered a room,
Rachel, if possible, left it.  If the housekeeper, in her flapping
slippers, shuffled out into the yard and cast herself down on the seat
beneath the apple tree, where Rachel was playing, the child immediately
gathered up her pebbles and shells and gravely sought another place.
She spoke no oftener to the housekeeper than was necessary, and when
she did speak, a weight of scorn trembled in her voice as if some
feeling were silently gathering power.  Nora Gage looked upon her with
her little eyes, which were shrewd and meditative, exactly as a pig's
are shrewd and meditative, and was apparently indifferent.  But it was
inconceivable that she did not hate her.

A part of a battered wreck and a figure-head were, in the truest sense,
Rachel's companions.  Both were rooted fast where they had come ashore,
but before they had reached that expanse of sand, the sea had had its
way with them.  They were by no means parts of the same craft, but
torn, hurled, gnawed, they had been brought, by the rollicking mood of
the ocean, past the fierce skirting of rocks outside and dashed there
together on the shore of the bay, to become the playmates of a little
child.

Timber by timber the wreck had been washed small, and sometimes after a
storm streams of rusty water that resembled blood trickled from its
various bolts.  Rachel, climbing out upon the wreck, sometimes felt the
shallow water sucking between its timbers urging it to put to sea
again; and, conscious of the tremble of eagerness in the poor maimed
thing, she would pat the beams in passionate sympathy, and lay her
cheek to them.  Often she tried to dislodge the great hulk by placing
her shoulder against it, and once, when the sea sucked off a plank and
the tide flung it on the shore several rods away, she spent the
following morning in hauling the dissevered portion back to the wreck
and trying to hammer it into position.  There was in her a curious
susceptibility to the pathos of things.

Here and there about the wreck vestiges of paint appeared, and a faint
assemblage of letters formed the name _Defender_ on what had been the
prow.  This paint Rachel brought to temporary brightness by rubbing it
with a corner of her apron dipped in sea water.  The sand that clogged
the ribs of the wreck she removed daily with a shovel.  In brief, no
waning sovereign, already in the clutch of death could have been waited
upon by a trusty handmaiden with more patience and love.  In her day
she had sailed many a stormy sea, that ship, and without doubt had made
many a difficult port; but now in the days of her nothingness to be
loved with a love passing that of sailor or captain (for in such
affection there is ever something of the seaman's pride in the
capabilities of his craft), to be loved, forsooth, with a deep feminine
tenderness,--surely, if comfort were possible to those broken bolts and
spars, the wreck was comforted.  And, testifying to the gallantry
inherent in every timber, all that remained of her responded to the
thrill of the child's spirit.  It was as if the wreck heard commands
summoning her to deeds of spiritual daring.  The stumps of her masts
she lifted to the sky with an air of defiance, she resisted the
encroachments of the sand; and in the upward sweep of her lines toward
her broken bow, there was indomitable courage and pride invincible.
Valour answered valour and the sun shone gently on the incongruous
playmates, on the wreck whose earthly voyages were over, and on the
child whose life's journey had scarcely begun.

For the figure-head, Rachel entertained a somewhat different sentiment.
It was evidently a bit of German carving, and represented a robust
goddess with face lifted to the sky.  Full waves of hair blew back from
the face; the chin was gone, the nose was gone, but in the gaze of the
eyes was blank, unquestioning triumph.  She was clad in swirling
drapery and a breastplate of overlapping scales, and in the one arm
that remained to her she carried a sceptre tipped with a diminutive
crown.  Rachel admired the way the figure-head stood proudly erect,
even strained backwards, and sometimes grasping a stick, she paced the
sands in grotesque imitation of the wooden woman.  But more often she
sat before her lost in silent contemplation.  She saw her fastened to
the prow of a vessel, "great-kneed, deep-breasted," with lips and eyes
stung by the spray; she saw her bowing deep into the trough of a wave,
her gaze as she sank still intrepidly lifted to heaven; and she saw her
rise again, dripping, all gilded by the light of the sun.  The
exhilaration of life and hope were still in the figure-head, wrought
into her with the carving, it would seem, and these qualities her later
experience in the brine had heightened to a kind of glory, so that now,
unmindful that she was stranded, she stared out at the dawns and the
evenings and the far-away twinkling stars with the same undaunted look
of conquest.

This look, branded upon the figure-head and smitten into her round
staring pupils, had its effect upon the child.  Often and often when
there was a storm off Pemoquod and the green water ran fifty feet high
with the spray twice as high, grinding and pounding over the rocks and
even entering the bay, until its strong death-fingers reached her very
feet.

Persistent in her childish desires, imperious when they were crossed,
at all other times gentle and tractable, Rachel up to her ninth year
comprehended no force superior to that of which she was conscious in
herself.  Her grandfather she could sway by a word, and there were ways
she knew of compelling Nora Gage; as for Andr√©, he was a slave, to be
ruled by kindness for the most part and blows when necessary, blows
aimed straight at his wild dark face.  In her domain she tolerated no
insubordination.  But one night the pettiness of this domain and its
purely human limits were revealed to her.

When whiskey got the better of Captain Daniels at the lighthouse, and
this happened occasionally, Lizzie Goodenough, with a strong arm, could
draw the oil and tend the beacon.  If truth were told, it was because
he had recognised her possibilities for usefulness in this direction,
that the captain, sixteen years before, had taken pity on the girl and
her newly-born infant.  At the time he was just recovering from what he
termed "a bad spell," and Lizzie appealed to him as capable and sturdy;
moreover, she was very handsome, with a frown set squarely between her
brows and an ominous light in her glance.  He had never married her.
Now that her boy had grown large enough to go on watch at a pinch, the
arrangement was even more advantageous.

The immense corrugated lenses flashed diamond tints of inconceivable
brilliancy.  There, in rims of living colour, in circles of crystal,
that white gush of light that flooded the rocks below, was born.  There
was the glitter and clash of its nightly cradle.  The tower creaked and
the sea thundered like cannon, ghostly finger-tips tapped now and then
on the glass; a night bird, allured by the radiance, beat out its
brains on the costal.

